     MAILER DOCUMENTATION

     MAILER is a simple mailing-list maintenance program.
It creates and updates two fundamental data structures:
(1) a file of mailing records with fields for name, street,
city, state, zipcode, and phone number; and (2) an unbalanced
binary tree of keys, used to sort the records and to locate
a given record in the file.  The keys may be any of the
fields in the mailing records, at the user's discretion.

     When entered, the program prompts for the name of the
file to be handled.  If the file doesn't exist, the program
creates one, and initializes all its records to empty.  It
then prompts for the field which is to be used to sort and
search the file.

     Once this initialization is done, the user is given
a prompt line with seven options:

 A(dd M(odify P(rint F(ile N(ewsort S(et Q(uit

The use of these seven options is as follows.

     ADD:  Permits the user to add a new record to the file.

     MODIFY:  Allows modification of an existing record.
The user is asked for a target string, and the tree of
keys is searched for a match.  Matching is done by substrings,
so the string need not be complete; "Kirk", for example, will
match "Kirkwood" and "Kirkstein".  The record numbers and
keys of all matches are displayed; if more than one record is
found, the user is prompted for a particular record number.
Then the record may be modified on a field-by-field basis.
Two special inputs are recognized: <cr> leaves the given
field unchanged, while <cntrl-x> skips the rest of the
record.  Note: MODIFY can be used simply to examine a given
record by entering <cntrl-x> as the first response.

     PRINT produces a printout of the mailing list to an
arbitrary textfile, sorted according to the key field in
effect at the time.  The user may choose to print only
a subset of the file, by entering one of three options:
ALL prints everything in the file; ONLY prints only those
records whose keyfields contain the user-specified target
string; EXCEPT prints everything except those records whose
keyfields contain the user-specified target strings.  For
example, specifying "ONLY" and the target string "CA", if
the state keyfield is in effect, will list only those records
whose state is California.  Not all fields of the record need
be printed; see the SET option.  NOTE: Names may be entered 
last-name-first, to aid alphabetization, but they will be 
printed out first-name-first.  Thus "Mundie, David" is printed 
out as "David Mundie".


     FILE closes the current address file, and opens a new one.

     NEWSORT is used to change the field used for sorting and
accessing records.  For example, if the fields are currently
being sorted by name, the user may type N(ewsort, then
Z(ip to sort them by zipcode.

     SET is used to set the print fields used by PRINT.  The
default is to print everything except the phone number. The
new set of fields to be printed is specified by entering a
string containing the appropriate letters; for example, entering
'np' will cause PRINT only to print out the name and the
phone number.

     QUIT, obviously, is used to exit the program.


     -NOTE-

     No explicit provision is made for deleting records.  The
same effect, however, can be had by MODIFYing the records to
contain a special field, such as @.  PRINTing with an 
except '@' option will ignore deleted records; they may be
reused by a MODIFY using '@' as the target. 
