
                             A GUIDE TO THIS VOLUME

     First, a list of the documentation files on the disk and to which 
programs they refer:

     CPM.DOC.TEXT.  Miscellaneous comments on the operation of the 8080/Z-80
interpreter.  Also contains the documentation for DISKREAD, GETCPM and
GETCPM2, RWCPM, READCPM, and INOUTREADY.  (Note that a UCSD-to-CP/M file
copier will be included on a subsequent disk; these all go the other way.)

     PRETTY.DOC.  This discusses PRETTY (including INITVAR) and FORMAT
(including FORMAT1 and FORMAT2).

     FORMAT.DOC.  More extensive user instructions for FORMAT thru FORMAT2.

     GOTCHA.DOC.  Stand-alone comments on the hidden hardware requirements for 
Z-80 and 8080 users.

     UNITS.DOC.  More stand-alone comments, this time distinguishing UNITS,
EXTERNAL procedures/functions, and SEGMENT procedures/functions.

     INTRODUCTN.  This file is a copy of the paper in the Proceedings of the 
Fourth West Coast Computer Faire, and represents the initial goals of this 
library of software and other comments.  I have since been in touch with 
SofTec; the present status of the Users' Group Library should be documented 
separately. 


     
     Next, let's look at the other files:

     COMBINE.  This is a very early attempt by me.  Problems include less than 
perfect file-getting (see CRT.I.O for a superior version) and the slowest 
procedure in UCSD Pascal:  reading and writing lines of text.

     
     CRT.I.O.  I like this set of routines a great deal, and I hope you find
them useful.  They are designed to assist you in obtaining data from a naive
user in an interactive environment in a way that is "chimpanzee proof": no
matter what you type (within limits), you can't crash the program or mar the
display.  All but GETFILE are designed to enter data directly into a menu on
the CRT, and require the X-Y locations of the data requested.  Except GETFILE,
all routines can be exited by typing <escape>, leaving the original data
undisturbed.  Further, the integer routine does automatic range checking and
won't let the user out until the data is correct or the user types <escape>.
GETFILE allows the user to quit the program by typing an empty line in
response to a filename request, though this action is first verified.

     
     
     L.  This stands for L(ist, and is a very handy file lister.  At present 
it is configured for my Malibu dot-matrix printer, and expands headings if the 
filename is to be included.  It is designed to list both programs (ask it to 
include the filename) and manuscripts (heading optional; not printed on first 
page nor expanded).  The options are as follows:

     1)  Line spacing, single to 4 lines.

     2)  Whether or not to print a page heading.

     3)  If you choose a heading, you can include the filename and limited 
other data (printed expanded) or skip the filename and write another heading 
of your choice (none is required).

     4)  You can print all or part of a file by specifying beginning and 
ending page numbers.

     
     
     MODEM (includes the 8080 routine CRC16) and MODEM1.  These two D. C.
Hayes drivers should be fairly self-documenting.  I don't have a modem and
haven't tested them.  The main problem with these sorts of programs is that as 
yet, there is no data transmission standard, so the guy on the other end of
the line must agree with your protocol.

     
     
     SIMP stands for Simplified Integral Modular Prose generator.  I think 
it's much more fun if you see what it does for yourself; it will dump its 
output on the console or the printer (your choice).

     
     
     TYPESET is Sam Singer's gift to his wife, and simply right justifies any 
text presented to it.  It is designed for his Qume and personalized Qume 
driver, but should be easy to modify for other printers with micro spacing.  
The text output is a single, long column, of the same basic column width as 
the original (set in the Editor).  Sam tried for hyphenation but couldn't get 
it to work.
