




         
























                         Disk Block Read/Write/Modify


                                      by


                                Roger L. Soles


                       Georgia Institute of Technology
                                  Box 36177
                              Atlanta, GA  30332





















1






              Disk Block Read/Write/Modify (afterwards referred to as
         "DISKREAD") is a system utility program  designed  to  allow
         the knowledgable user a means through which he can read  in-
         formation  from disk, modify that information, and place  it
         back onto the disk. It's primary design purpose is to  allow
         the user to make quick disk patches, either  in  his  system
         files, or any other file.  (Basically,  a  very  smart  DUMP
         facility with dynamic disk and RAM updating capability! - F.
         Monaco). 


         
                                  WARNING!  
         

              This program can totaly obliterate the  information  on
         the disk (and RAM), and therefore it must be  considered  as
         dangerous to the unfamiliar user - please acquaint  yourself
         with it's operation before proceeding to utilize it. 

              The screen consists of several distinct fields: 

              1) The upper part of the screen will have a  field  in-
         dicating  the current block number and the current unit  (or
         volume) number in both decimal and hex, as a rule quantities
         that "DISKREAD" displays will  always  be  in  hex.  Between
         these is an indicator, either HEX or ASCII, this  refers  to
         the mode in which the data from the  disk  block  is  to  be
         displayed. 

              2) A command prompt line: all commands and  user  input
         quantities will be entered here. When the  cursor  is  here,
         "DISKREAD" is waiting for a user input. 

              3) The disk block buffer area. This area is bounded  by
         a row and a column of numbers, the  actual  address  of  any
         byte in the buffer is the logical sum of the two quantities,
         and thus a little knowledge about  hexidecimal  addition  is
         needed to utilize the displayed information efficiently. The
         contents of the buffer are displayed in the current mode. In
         ASCII mode, only legal ASCII characters are displayed;  that
         is ' '..'}'; all other ASCII codes are displayed as blanks. 

              The commands of "DISKREAD" are: 


                                     
                       1) Set ASCII display mode : 'a'
                                     

              This command will immediately display the  contents  of
         the disk block buffer in ASCII and set the mode indicator to
         show this. 



                                    - 1 -                              
1

         Diskread                                         30 Apr 1980 



           
                    2)  Set HEXIDECIMAL display mode : 'h'
           

              This command will immediately display the  contents  of
         the disk block buffer in hex and set the mode  indicator  to
         show this. 


           
                          3)  READ a disk block : 'r'
           

              This command will cause "DISKREAD" to read in the  disk
         block specified by the current blocknumber from  the  volume
         specified in the current unitnumber. If the I/O  process  is
         not complete, "DISKREAD" alerts the  user  and  displays  an
         error message, hit RETURN to continue. 


                                       
                      4)  WRITE the buffer to disk : 'w'
                                       

              This command will cause "DISKREAD"  to  write  out  the
         contents of the buffer to the block specified by the current
         block number on the volume specified  by  the  current  unit
         number. Before the process is completed,  verification  from
         the user is requested, typing anything  except  'y'  or  'Y'
         will abort the process. 


                        
                                  WARNING!  
                        

              This is the only dangerous command in "DISKREAD",  once
         a buffer has been written to disk, the information that  was
         prevously in the block on the disk is lost! 

              If the I/O process is not complete,  "DISKREAD"  alerts
         the user and  displays  an  error  message,  hit  RETURN  to
         continue. 


          
                     5) INCREMENT disk block number : '+'
          

              This command will increment the current blocknumber  by
         one each time it is pressed. If the blocknumber exceeds  the
         MAXBLOCKS on the disk, the number wraps around to zero.  For
         convenience the ';' may also be used so that the  user  does
         not have to hit the shift key. 



                                    - 2 -                              
1

         Diskread                                         30 Apr 1980 



                               
                     6) DECREMENT disk block number : '-'
                               

              This command will decrement the current blocknumber  by
         one each time it is pressed. If the blocknumber  goes  below
         zero,  then  number  wraps  around  to  the  MAXBLOCKS.  For
         convenience, if the keyboard is shift locked,  the  '='  may
         also be used. 


              
                        7) Set the BLOCK NUMBER : 'b'
              

              This command allows the  user  to  enter  the  absolute
         block address directly in  either  hexidecimal  or  decimal,
         default is decimal, but a '$' anywhere in  the  input  field
         will cause the number to be processed as a hex number  (this
         is true of all numeric  input).  Special  Note:  users  with
         mini-floppies or hard disks will have to change the constant
         in the beginning of "DISKREAD" to reflect the correct number
         of blocks! 


           
                         8) Set the UNIT NUMBER : 'u'
           

              This command allows the user to enter the volume number
         on which further operations are to take place, if the number
         entered is not a vailide block device then the default value
         of four is substituted - no error message is given! 


                                                    
                     9) CHANGE buffer byte by byte : 'c'
                                                    

              This command allows the user to change the buffer  con-
         tents  byte by byte. The user is first ask  for  a  starting
         address at which the changes are to  begin,  then  he  enter
         each change. The displayed numbers are the current  address,
         and the value of the buffer at that  address.  To  terminate
         the change mode, simply type return with no other entry. 


                                                         
                           10) STRING CHANGES : 's'
                                                         

              This command allows the user to chage the  buffer  con-
         tents  to values which are equivalent to  an  input  string.
         The user is ask to supply a starting address for the  string
         and the string, the change takes up as  many  bytes  as  are


                                    - 3 -                              
1

         Diskread                                         30 Apr 1980 



         needed for the string, trailing blanks are significant! 


                                                        
                           11) MEMORY UPDATE : 'm'
                                                        

              This command allows the user to change large amounts of
         the buffer with a single command. The starting address,  the
         ending address, and the value to update the buffer  to  must
         be supplied when  requested,  if  the  starting  address  is
         larger than the ending addres the proccess is aborted. 


                                                       
                                12) QUIT : 'q'
                                                       

              This command terminates "DISKREAD", the buffer  is  not
         saved automatically! 


                     
                           Some General Suggestions
                     

              Numeric inputs may be either hex or decimal,  generally
         error messages are not given, "DISKREAD" assumes the user is
         very familar with this program, and that he  simply  made  a
         typing error, any  quantity  may  be  corrected  before  the
         return key is hit by simply back spacing, and  either  upper
         of lower case characters can be used for  commands  and  hex
         digits. 


        
                   Please send comments and suggestions to:
        


        
                                Roger L. Soles
        
                       Georgia Institute of Technology
        
                              Atlanta, GA  30332
        


        


        
                                   NOTICE:
        


                                    - 4 -                              
1

         Diskread                                         30 Apr 1980 






              This program is for free  distribution  ONLY,  and  the
         copyright notice and author name may not be removed! 
