     
         SOME REQUESTS FOR PASCAL SOFTWARE FOR THE USERS' GROUP LIBRARY

     As a programmer, what I like most is a challange that requires careful
thought to carry off, yet is of manageable size and will make a definite
contribution to the efforts of others.  So I thought I'd offer you some
programming challenges:

     A.  A directory program that would be called up from the Command level 
(not in the filer), and display the contents of a disk in two or three 
alphabetized columns in one screenful.  The size of each file would be 
included, and perhaps the date.  Following the named files, one would list
the unutilized areas of a disk individually, by block range and size. 
For example, an unused area might be indicated in the following manner: 
"<400-450 empty>   51", where the "51" would line up with the blocks per file
column. A summary line at the bottom would list the total number of files and
the vacant space on the disk.  To save time, you would invoke the directory of
a given disk simply by typing the unit number desired.  For example, typing
"X(ecute) 4 <carriage return>" would produce the directory of the main disk
drive.

     B. We need a library of procedures to BLOCKREAD and BLOCKWRITE untyped
files, then CREAD (or whatever name you want) a character, LNREAD a line, and
CWRITE and LNWRITE respectively.  Not only would this markedly expedite
textfile handling in the present P-code Pascals that support untyped files,
but these procedures are the ONLY way to access files with the present native-
code compilers that run on micros.

     C. We need a good double-precision integer package written in Standard 
Pascal to augment the present inadequate limitations of MAXINT.

     D. We need a package of input/output procedures for money (usually 
represented as integer cents), so the user can type a decimal point and not
confuse the computer.  A nice touch is to have the cursor stay put at the
dollar units position of the number to be entered, and have the number of
dollars grow to the left as it is typed in. Then, when the decimal point is
typed, the cursor steps to the right one character at a time as the user fills
in the cents value.

     E. Someone interested in mathematics should tackle a complex-number
package.

     F. A simple "data base system" consisting of: 1) a means to define the
names of a number of fields, 2) a way of entering/correcting data within each
field, 3) successive or random access to records, 4) a disk sort by a single
field (if you wanted multiple fields in order you'd do multiple sorts), and 5)
a key extraction program, where one would make a subfile consisting of all
the records in the main file that had one field equal to a certain value or
falling within a certain range.  As an alternative to sorting the records
themselves, one could use an ISAM approach.

     Because Pascal saves textfiles as lines with dynamic length terminated by 
an end-of-line character, the easiest and most space-saving way to represent
the data would be as ASCII strings.  The program could be very general if the
zeroth record in a data file defined the data:

first  line:    Number of elements per record (in ASCII) (call it "n"). 
second line:    Name of first element, and perhaps an ASCII code of data type.
. . .           . . . 
nth    line:    Name and type code of n-1th element.
n+1th  line:    Name and type code of nth element.

     Then, each successive record might begin with an ASCII record number and 
the actual data of each record element, all of dynamic length.  So you'd never
have to specify field width; you would simply be limited by the maximum
length of the character array or string when the data was in memory.
