
                           UNLPATCH

Submitted by:  Henry E. Baumgarten
               Department of Chemistry
               University of Nebraska, Lincoln
               Lincoln, Nebraska 68588-0304
               (402) 472-3301

     UNLPATCH is a patch-dump program intended to facilitate the examination,
revision (patching), and printing (dumping) of UCSD files, disks, and memory.
In its present form operations on memory are limited largely to the examin-
ation of the UNLPATCH program itself and those portions of the operating
system which are resident in memory.  This program may also be used for the
examination, patching, and dumping of RT-11 disk blocks; however, the
present version is not designed to read RT-11 directories; therefore, it
cannot be used with RT-11 files.  The program is neither as elegant nor as
bug-ridden as the UCSD PATCH program the author received with Version 2.0. It
is intended to be fairly easy to use and fairly forgiving of user blunders;
however, as with most patching operations, it is wise to back-up disks and
files before using this program.

Preparing the code file:
     
     On the author`s Heath H11A system (DEC LSI-11/2, UNL mongrel version)
using Version 2.0 of UCSD Pascal, compilation of UNLPATCH.1.TEXT gives a
runnable version of UNLPATCH.CODE (without linking)---i.e., the "software
tools" the author often uses are built into the program rather than taken from
a library.  Those persons having an editor capable of handling large files may
wish to combine UNLPATCH.1.TEXT WITH UNLPATCH.2.TEXT.  The program appears to
compile and work properly with Version 4.0 also; however, for many purposes 
the author prefers Version 2.0 over 4.0 and has not used this program 
extensively with 4.0.  Furthermore, the author has found that that Version
2.0 is sometimes more forgiving than Version 4.0; therefore, it is possible
that "bugs" not known to the author may still be lurking within. Since the
author has not had the opportunity to test this program with non-DEC
microprocessors, users should test this program carefully to determine if
their microprocessors have system-dependent idiosyncracies that will require
editing of the source. This will be especially important for those persons
having machines whose byte sex is different from that of the LSI-11 (least
significant byte goes into byte 0 of a word, most significant byte into byte
1). Making changes to accommodate different byte sexes should not be 
difficult. Making the the changes necessary to address extended memory may
be more difficult.

UNLPATCH conventions:

     Data formats allowed are bytes, words, and characters.  Data, whether 
from a file, a disk, or memory, is handled in blocks of 512 bytes.

     Radices (number bases) in this version are limited to the following.

       Disk, file, or memory blocks:   8 or 10  (starting block = 0)
       Words (16 bits):                8 or 16  (10 defaults to 8)
       Bytes (8 bits):                 8, 10, or 16
       Addresses:                      8 or 16  (10 defaults to 8)

     Characters are assumed to be ASCII-coded with non-printable char (0 to 
31, 128 to 255 (base 10)) given in byte-form in the current radix.  

