
                          DOCUMENTATION FOR THE FILES 
                   ON THE UCSD PASCAL USERS' LIBRARY VOLUME 4

1.  PROF. KEN BOWLES' DATABASE SEED

     The major portion of the disk is taken up by Prof. Ken Bowles' database
seed, which he donated to the users' library as a tutorial on how to build a
data structure with records of variable size. Originally, it functioned as the
starting point for student homework projects within a course at UCSD.  It is
not intended as a commercial product, nor as a foundation for one, and is
available to users explicitly for noncommercial purposes only.

     This is not a database system; rather, it is a collection of routines 
to represent and access data structured in various ways.  To get a real
database management system, you would have to add a means of logically
grouping and structuring your data, as well as a representation-independent
user interface.  Many of the required utilities are suggested in the
documentation as student projects.

     The file KB.DATABASE.DOC is taken from the handout given to the students. 
The handout also contained listings of the routines of the data system itself,
all of which are present on the disk in source form.  Program listing page
numbers referenced in the handout are not available, but program line numbers
are also given; you should be able to figure out which portions of the
programs are being referred to by Dr. Bowles.  Missing from the disk are three
figures diagramming the heirarchical nature of the data structure, showing
that fields and records can be declared recursively and referenced by links of
pointers, all within a fixed, 4-kilobyte frame.

     I have not personally tried out any of the routines, except to run the 
demo program DBDEMO.TEXT, which must be given the database name "TESTDB" when 
it asks for the name of the database file.  It is complex and fancy.  

     However, I found the comments within the handout illuminating, and I 
suspect that the many projects suggested by Prof. Bowles within the handout 
would make fascinating exercises for experienced programmers seeking to learn 
more about Pascal.  I doubt that the database holds more than an example of 
good programming for beginners, although if you're good at learning on your 
own and stick with it, you may get quite a bit out of it.

     Note that the screen control unit KB.SCUNIT.TEXT must be reconfigured
for your CRT terminal and then compiled before the rest of the programs will
work properly.  I have taken care of breaking up DBUNIT.TEXT into smaller 
chunks that will fit in memory for the E6 editor; remember to compensate for
the $I compiler directives when calculating line numbers on the listing.  I 
made no other changes.

     
2.  OTHER ITEMS ON THE DISK

     INDEX.TEXT is a greatly expanded index (by section, alas not by page) to 
Jensen and Wirth's PASCAL USER MANUAL AND REPORT.  It greatly aids looking up 
those syntactical queries.

     COMPARE.TEXT is from the Pascal User Group's PASCAL NEWS No. 12, pp. 20-
23, June, 1978, and was written by James F. Miner, who retains copyright but 
has released the program for non-profit use.  It does a very good job of 
comparing similar textfiles and pointing out differences.  Notably, it is good 
at discovering chunks of text that are present in one file but not in the 
other, and then discovering where the files are the same again.  The printout 
is pretty; the runtime is long.  It ran well on my system.  It is documented 
further within the source text.

     COMPRESS.TEXT was written and donated by Ted Beck.  It compresses spaces
at the beginning of a line of text (changing them to the UCSD blank
compression code, 16 [control P or DLE], followed by a byte representing the
number of spaces plus 31) and removes blanks at the end of each line.  It is
intended to shrink files transferred from other operating systems.  I found a
curious bug when I tried to compile Ted's original program: my 2.0 compiler
would die when it confronted a FILLCHAR, MOVELEFT, or MOVERIGHT intrinsic--
everything just stopped.  So I altered the program to use more standard Pascal
syntax, and it runs well.

     DISK_COPY.TEXT is Ted Beck's version of MAPPER, the routine available 
from Western Digital to translate the "standard" RT-11-like UCSD 8-inch disk 
format to that used by the Microengine.  Unlike other versions I have heard 
about, it will run ONLY on a Microengine, not on other systems (even if 
recompiled).  Since Microengine users can't read this disk without a 
functioning mapper program, the chief value of this program is that it is 
available in source form.  Because I don't have a Microengine, I have not 
tried out the program.

     USUS.NEWS.TEXT tells you all about the new UCSD System Users' Society.

     WUMPUS hardly needs documentation, and what is required is provided by 
the program.  I thought the author implemented it well.  I removed the
requirement for asynchronous i/o in order to initialize the random number
generator (which ran until a key was pressed), without apparant difficulty.
