
          An Introduction to Using the Pacsal Transfer Program

     This brief introduction will hopefully provide you with enough
information to run PTP. The first question you will be asked after starting
PTP is if your system can support binary mode. Inorder to support this 
your modem (serial port) must be able to pass any 8-bit byte to the PTP
program (most home systems can do this - most time sharing systems can not).
Binary mode always considerably fast transfer and should be used if
possible. The next questions select valid speeds at which your modem can
operate. Simply answer yes to the valid baud rates. To support mulitple baud
rates your modem baud rate must be software settable with the baud assembly
language routine, if is not answer yes only to the 300 baud rate which will
keep the baud rate at its inital value. Because the program uses a split baud
rate for transmit and receive during baud rate negotiation it is not possible
to switch baud rates manually. 

     Next the number of data characters that can be sent and  received in
one packet is requested. The actual packet maybe considerable larger due to
packet overhead. The larger the packet the more likely a transmission error
will occur.

     The answer or orginate mode of the program must be different for two
communciating programs. This is set to orginate mode when you dial a number
and to answer when you go into an answer mode. The mode of the modem is set
to the same mode as the program. 
     
     The top level menu varies depending upon if a carrier is detect. In
the case there is no carrier the menu is as followed:

     Autoans  - Wait for the phone to ring, answer in answer mode and
                establish a connection. Typing any character will abort this 
                mode.

     Cntdial  - Continously redial the number after a delay in an attempt to 
                establish a connection.

     Dial     - Dial the number to be supplied. Do not use in spaces or other 
                characters inbetween digits. A "*" should cause the dialer to 
                wait for another dial tone detect (not tested). Typing any
                character will interrupt this function.

     Exit     - Exit the PTP program.

     Go       - Used to continue when a modem connection is already 
                established.

     Hangup   - Hangup the phone.

     Options  - Go to the options menu (see below).

     Redial   - Redial the number last dialed.

     Unattended - Same as autoanswer except that the program will go
                back into the autoanswer mode at the end of a connection
                to wait for the next call. Typing any character will exit
                this mode.

If a carrier is present the top level menu will be a subset of the above. The 
"go" command in this case causes the modems to attempt to establish a 
connection (usefully when you have been using voice and now wish to
connect the programs without having to hangup).

     The options menu allows the following options to be set:

     PTP - Set the PTP mode which is what the program is all about.

     Mode- Allows the resetting of the modes and baud rates setup
           when the program was started. This will result in the 
           renegotion of the mode and baud rates with the other
           computer.

     Trace- Set the tracing flags used for debugging. Also used to set
           the local loopback mode (see trace below).
     
     Raw - This puts you in a raw terminal mode in which makes the system
           look like a terminal and is intented mainly to allow logging 
           into timesharing systems. Type a control-E to exit this mode.
     
     Baud- Set the baud rate to be used in raw mode.

     Fullduplex - Set full duplex raw mode.

     Halfduplex - Set half duplex raw mode.
     
     If you have made contact with another PTP both programs should now be in
a loop sending empty packets back and forth. The first thing you will see
after a connection is established is the id of the other program. 
After this the programs will negotate binary or radix-41 mode, the baud rate 
and buffer sizes. At this point you may try to send a terminal to terminal
message. To do this type the first character of the message and wait for a
">" follwed by the character you typed. Type the rest of the message and hit
return (if the message is to long echoing will stop and the first part will
be sent). The message will then be sent to the other PTP. It should be
realised that whenever a PTP program is waiting for a character from the
keyboard it will not be listening or sending on the modem line. This will
cause the PTP on the other end to timeout while waiting for a transmission
and display a receiver timeout message. If this were to continue for a long
time the PTP on the other end would finally give up and abort. Also even
after you finish typing your message it may take several transmissions for
the programs to get their half duplex transmissions resynced (both programs
may be sending at the same time and miss part of the other's transmission).
This condition should correct itself shortly since the timeout for answer and
orginate modes are different.
 
     To send files or perform other functions it is first necessary to get
the attention of the PTP, to do this type a control-E and wait. A menu should
be displayed shortly simlar to the type displayed by the UCSD Pascal system.
It should be remebered that when the program is in this mode it is the other
PTP will be experiencing receiver timeouts. To exit the menu function and
return control to PTP just hit a carriage return to the menu display. The
following is a description of the current menu functions:

     Get - Get a file from the other system. It should be noted that you
           must already know the name of the file you wish transfered
           and there is no remote list directory function. For this
           reason it would be a good idea if each system contained a
           file with the well know name "dir.text" which contains the 
           name of the files which that person is willing to have
           transfered. 

     Send - Send a file from your system to the other system. The PTP
            program will not create a file on a system if it already
            exists. This is to prevent overwriting files on the other
            system which you did not know existed.

     Init - This function will reinitialize most of the counters
           in the program. If you are in contact with another PTP
           this will result in a loss of sequencing.
    
     Exit - Will cause PTP to terminate and return to the top menu level.

     Mode- See mode above.

     Trace- See trace below.

     
     Trace allows you to control various trace and other options as
described below:
          
          Trace LTB - Trace the link transmission blocks. This trace
                      dumps the variously encoded forms of all 
                      transmissions sent and received. It is helpful
                      in gaining an understanding of how the program
                      works but does a lot of data and must be used
                      with CRT type terminal.

        Trace PPS - Trace the process to process stream functions. In
                     general this trace is not very helpful unless you
                     already know what you are looking for.

        Trace FTP - Trace the file transfer functions and data. 

        Local loopback test - This puts the program in a mode where
                    it talks to itself and can be very useful in 
                    testing the program especially when combined
                    with the LTB trace. You should try this mode
                    before attempting to use this program with 
                    another PTP to see if the program will run on
                    your system.

     
     Because of the low baud rates that our modems use and the encoding done
in the PCNET format the transmission of files will be very slow, however, the
transfered file should contain no transmission errors and any type of file
including binary can be transfered. In addition files can be transfered in
both directions at the same time and the terminal to terminal mode can still
be used. Inorder to give you some assurance that the program is running      
a dot will be printed when an packet is received. Be sure you are in PTP mode
when you wish to transfer files. Best of luck and please contact me with
errors, questions, or suggestions you may have.

Mark Gang
408-267-4913

     
