
The following files make up the Pascal Transfer Program:

PTP.TEXT - This the main program written entirely Pascal.

PTP.CODE - A compiled but not linked version of the main program PTP.TEXT.
           PTP.TEXT requires a 56K system to compile therefore 
           this precompiled version can be used as the main program
           during linking by those with less memory. Be sure not
           to call the outfile of the linker PTP.CODE or this
           file will be destroyed.


PTPMMI.CODE - A linked version ready to run with a PMMI modem.

SYSNAME  - A text file that contains the nodes id string (see example).

KBSTAT   - An assemble language function which return a TRUE if
           there is a character ready at the keyboard port.
           Since this routine calls the CP/M keyboard status
           routine it should work with most system that use
           the CP/M BIOS.
           
MRECSTAT - An assemble language function which returns TRUE if 
           there is a character ready at the modem receiver port.

MREAD    - An assemble language function which returns a character 
           from the modem receive port. If no character is ready this 
           routine will wait for one. This routine could be replaced
           by a read from unit #7 (remote in) if implemeted in your
           system.
           
MWRITE   - An assemble language procedure which writes a character
           to the modem xmit port. If the line is busy this routine will
           wait for the line to become ready. This routine could
           be replaced by a write to unit #7 (remote out) if 
           implemented in your system.

MODEMINI - An assemble language routine to initialize the modem at
           startup.

HANGUP   - An assemble language routine to hangup the phone (on hook)

CTS      - Returns TRUE if clear-to-send is set on the modem (may use
           carrier detect on other modems). Indicates that a connection
           is established.
           
DTRON    - Turns data-terminal-ready on to allow the modem to operate.

RINGING  - Returns TRUE if the phone is ringing.

RI       - Set the ring-indicator in the PMMI modem causing the modem
           to go off-hook in answer mode.
           
SH       - Causes the modem to go off-hook in orginate mode.

DTONEDET - Returns TRUE if a dial tone is detected.

DIALER   - Dials one digit of a phone number, digit maybe in either
           ASCII or binary.
           
BAUD     - Set the specified baud rate. The value passed to this assemble
           language routine must be the value to output to the modem not
           necessarly the actual baud rate. Baud rate calculations are
           done in the PASCAL program.


