
{
This is a modified version of an unpublished, copyrighted 
program called TERMINAL by Robert W. Peterson.  TOMUSUS
uses the unit REMUNIT by R.W. Peterson as modified by Walt
Farrell and myself.

Modifications by this author are in lower case throughout the
program.  Since the original TERMINAL code was entirely in upper
case, except for a few user prompt output, all modifications can
be identified by the use of lower case.  Original code that have
simply been moved from one location to another retain their upper
case.

TOMUSUS differs from TERMINAL in the following ways:

       (1)  Saving the log file is done automatically.
       
       (2)  The logtext option can be switched on and off
            without re-initializing.
            
       (3)  The printer can be switched on and off at any
            time independent of the logtext options.
       
       (4)  The following options have been deleted:
       
                  Videotext
                  Filter control characters
                  Logtext to printer and console
                  
       (5)  The menu has been changed.  UCSD system style
            menus are used.  The menu is automatically
            exited after each menu function is completed.
            Control-E is used to enter the menu.  Control-C
            or the C(ontinue option will exit the menu
            immediately.  The Q(uit option terminate the
            program after closing previously opened files.
            The L(ogfile option has sub-options to open or 
            close files.  The P(rinter option is a toggle
            switch that opens and closes the printer file.
            The T(ransmit option has been simplified by the
            removal of all sub-options except the filename
            selection.  O(ptions is now the central place for
            all other options previously residing in other
            places, e.g. initialization and transmit.
            
TOMUSUS is designed primarily for the LSI-11, but it may work
on other hardware running UCSD Version IV.0.  It will not run
on Version II.0, because the required REMUNIT does not compile
on II.0.

VERSION 03:  Version 03 differs from Version 02 as follows:

  (1)   The Version 03 menu includes the option B(reak.  Therefore,
        it assumes that CR_BREAK has been implemented in REMUNIT.
        
  (2)   The Version 03 menu also includes the option X(off.  
        This permits XOFF (control-S) to be transmitted to the
        remote computer.  (Typing control-S instead of using X(off
        causes the p-system to pause rather than the remote system.)
        No TOMUSUS option is necessary to transmit XON, because
        control-Q and control-W are passed to the remote system by
        the p-system.
        
  (3)   Execution of the Logfile option has been speeded up consider-
        ably, thanks to Richard Yensen's modification that replaced
        the WRITE to disk statement with the BLOCKWRITE statement.
        This change further permitted the deletion of the XOFF/XON
        sequence thereby making it possible to use the Logfile option
        when communicating with remote systems that do not recognize
        XOFF/XON.
        
        Yensen also replaced the WRITE to console and WRITE to printer
        statements with UNITWRITE statements.
        
  (4)   A submenu has been installed in Options.  This permits a more
        direct access to each TOMUSUS setting.


All inquiries about this program should be addressed to:

        Michael A. Ikezawa
        10 Packsaddle Road West
        Rolling Hills, CA 90274

        (213)541-2918
}

